The prophet Muhammad sallallah.aihi
wasallam told us that whoever builds a
mosque for Allah, Allah will build for
him a sim at a house in Jenna. And we
know the great reward that will not only
be gained but rather will fill your
grave after your death. Whenever someone
prays there, whenever someone gives
shahada in the masid, whenever someone
learns something in the masid, yes, that
will be something that you'll have on
your scale.
[Music]
How are you guys doing?
Welcome to another podcast of the MH
podcast. And I'm here with a very good
friend of mine, a man who I have been, I
would say, honored, privileged, you
know, to uh
to be with in terms of the the Azar. We
were doing a lot of the studies together
before the examinations. Azhar by the
way for those who don't know actually
Mosab
should I call you sheh Mosab now is that
I don't know you're taking those titles
tell us what alar is for those people
who don't even know what what it is
for having me on of course reciprocated
Muhammad hijab very good friend and
student alhamdulillah and yeah we shared
this journey together this uh It's
challenging tough four year journey.
Yeah. And and I think while we were
doing it, we were like there were
moments of stress. There were moments of
tense like are we going to get through
this right? Oh my god. Yeah. Proper. And
you know we've had our ups and downs and
alhamdulillah we made it managed to get
through one piece with our sanity
intact. Um absolutely. But yeah I mean I
mean it's always been a dream of mine
maybe yours as well to to study an
institution of such a caliber. Um what
is Alazar? Alasar is a is an institution
um that was founded in the fatimate era.
So it has a long history um and by the
by
and and and through time it's evolved
and it has produced time you know
throughout time great great scholars and
luminaries. Yeah. And it's actually in
fact older than Oxford older than
Oxford. Older than at Cambridge as well.
It's probably one of the oldest
universities in the world, isn't it? the
world and and to you know and that just
kind of is is a statement and a you know
um proof of the civilization that we
reached we're providing those
institutions and also like you could
argue it's the most impressive Islamic
you know I mean this might be for a long
period of time for a long period of time
how about now would you say is the top
one now I think now it's got a
reputation of not being as what it used
to be it's kind of declined in its
quality but I think many institutions
have and many institutions do over And I
think that that's a number of factors,
political, social, you know, and and
even economical. And but I still think
the curriculum we studies at least we're
going to go through that. Yeah. Yeah.
And it was and it was good. It was But
before we do that, I want to show you
something.
So people might not know
um that we've done this before. I mean,
if you remember
this man has already been seen by
millions of people. Maybe they don't
remember who he is, but he was a man who
was there when I was wrestling Kamza
Chumay. And there was a particular thing
that you did that I was when afterwards
I looked at it and I was thinking this
is a very um very unusual thing as you
can see here. Now I'm trying to sprawl
and he's got his undouble under hooks
there and there you are sticking your
hand out helping him.
I've been exposed. I've been exposed.
Because had that hand not been there, I
would have spled and you know maybe
could have take down could have got the
points.
Actually, that was a fun day, wasn't it?
Because it was sporadic that you know um
that we decided to to wrestle this guy.
In fact, we had an exam on the day. We
done an exam on the same day. We had an
exam on the same day. We were on road
and then we had a little nap. And then
after we had the nap, I said, "You know
what will be an interesting idea?" Uh,
wrestling comes out for charity or
something like that. I remember it was
so spontaneous. It was good memory. Good
time. And it was fun. Yeah, it was. And
I think I took a kick to to the rib by
either you Hamza. I mean, I got side
kick. I remember. I'm happy to hit me in
the head. Maybe I wouldn't have
graduated. Actually, mah, you got your
black belt in Brazilian jiu-jitsu as
well. And you were managing that with
the Azhar. Yeah, I think. Um, yeah. So,
this is a good point about, you know,
obviously we're we're in a we're in a
time we're very busy. You're more busy
than me, but you know, I was juggling,
you know, full-time work. Um, obviously
doing the jiu-jitsu. I was aiming
towards my black belt, doing this
degree. I was also doing a master's
degree as well. So, there was a lot of
things I had to juggle. Obviously,
family as well. Um, so it's all about
Yeah. time prioritization, time
management, time management. And we had
this chunking system where we said we're
going to call each other at a certain
time and say for example like a month or
two before the exam we'd have something
like a routine that these are the days
I'm going to call you. We'd put it in
each other's diaries and we'd spend like
2 three hours on the phone sometimes
together one to three hours I would say
as as an average and we'd go through
some of the the syllabus and some of the
past papers. Um I found that actually
really really um helpful to be honest.
The strategy. Yeah, definitely a good
strategy I think because some of the
topics are they're so vast and there's
so much, you know, depth and breadth
that we have to kind of be strategic
with the way we study and be surgical.
And I think that's what we done. We we
isolated a few core topics that
definitely it was really and now now
that I'm thinking about it, it was
really stressful, bro. It was the exams
cuz you got like 10 examinations in each
uh season and there was 20 examinations
a year. And when I think about that,
bro, like they were not easy. Some of
the modules were really really
difficult. They were difficult and they
went into quite a lot of detail. Um and
we can cover some of the subjects we
covered but there was a broad range of
subject. Yeah. Let's do that then. Show
us the guys like you know how this
happens. Yeah. And I think we can go
through after you know if anyone wants
to if anyone's interested in signing up
we can kind of explain you know how that
works process but I mean we covered
various topics. So we we studied for
example obviously you know from salah
all the way down to punishments and and
stuff. Um punishments that you should be
giving up.
But
grammar,
we done, we studied the history of
sociology, obviously the Quran, Hadith,
of Quran,
um, we studied, um, lang, you know,
obviously linguistics, um, Islam,
economics, challenging. That was an
interesting one. Very interesting.
Ethics, orientalism, we covered
orientalism. They had good modules for
that stuff. Very good mod. research
methods even computers. So yeah, it or
something like even how to use Excel,
PowerPoint, uh, you know, cloud. It was
very what they're trying to do, I think,
is trying, they're trying to create an
allrounded whatever it is, she whatever
it is at the end of the program. It's
what's the point of being, you know, so
well verssed in whatever and you don't
even know how to do the computer and use
an Excel sheet or something% 100% and
yeah, I mean some good um Sufism that
theology and that was good. I think all
that stuff was really good. I mean, what
did you enjoy the most from it, would
you say? I I like to put myself in
positions, and I think you're the same,
where you're under kind of a bit of
stress that forces you to to grow. It
really it really did put us under
stress, didn't it? It really was a lot
of stress, wasn't it? And it filled up a
it filled gaps for me definitely because
obviously we we obviously we're in we're
in our 30s. We've studied about since we
were saying this. We've studied since we
were young. But this was good because of
the the breadth of topics. We covered a
lot of our gaps so in s and a lot of the
history and stuff like that and yeah
just going back to the point about
managing the time and I think this is
quite important I want to just phrase
this is is we want to be people of you
know and people of because there's there
in in the Quran in Arabic there's
there's there's different way there's
different words for actions but we want
to be the people of and what is so is a
consistent body of work over a period of
time and it has in it the ideas of
knowledge the ideas of intentionality.
So
Allah wants us to do actions not just
once but over a long period of time
continuously do the good deeds and also
with intentionality and purpose. Um like
when Allah is describing the that built
for
they were building him you know palaces
and statues and the verb use was because
you need planning you need structure to
build a statue takes a long effort and
work and resources and planning and
stuff like that versus tend to be
described in the Quran as as a one-off
action or a very swift action. So
swiftly punished these people
they pay one go or when when Ibraim
said
do it immediately implement this command
or
the angels that immediately implement
what Allah orders them. So in many
instances we see that one it's a quick
action when accidentally killed the
person
there was a but this one also shows not
only was it one strike it was
unintentional so there wasn't
intentionality behind it and what's
interesting is also just to add to to
finish this point off is in the Quran
says um
and this means that all of your actions
are encaptured not just the ones you
intend also the ones you don't intend
and like breathing you know everything
all your metadata if you like and so I
guess the point I'm trying to make is we
should be people of action have
long-term planning and vision and not
just so practically how would that look
like so how would someone if someone's
listening to you now maybe they're doing
their A levels maybe they're doing their
GCES maybe they're doing like you were
doing or your undergraduate degree or M
maybe they're not doing any of that and
instead maybe they're working for
part-time or full-time and they want to
have you know some kind of like sill
some kind of connection
with Islamic studies. They want to get
better at that stuff. They want to
understand the dean much more. What
would be the things that you would
advise them? Very good. Very good
question. And because it doesn't have to
be al does it? No. No. Yeah. No. No.
Yeah. Of course. 100%. It has to any
connection to knowledge, especially now
in in the time we live in where there's
so much misinformation. It's quite a lot
of ignorance. um more than ever Muslims
need to learn and go back to the dean
and start learning. And then you know I
he makes he makes a very beautiful poem
that summarizes this. This is
so he says who whosoever doesn't taste
the bitterness of studying even for an
hour
he will gulp he will guzzle he will
choke down the humiliation of ignorance
for the rest of his life. And whosoever
passes him in his in his youth the
opportunity to learn, then pray the
janaza prayer for him, for he's a dead
man. And it's very true because if if
you're ignorant and you don't know, it's
like the pain you might as pain of
discipline is better than the pain of
regret basically. 100%. And and so to
tack on to your point, it's very
important imperative for every Muslim um
to try at some capacity to learn um at
whatever level. Obviously, it doesn't
have to be advanced level. It could be
even basic starting starting. How Okay,
let's let's do that. So someone who's
just listening to this now and he says
look I just want to start from the
basics where where do I start? What
would you recommend for them? It's a
good question. I think firstly I would I
always prioritize Arabic because I
believe the Arabic is the language if
once you have access the Arabic you have
access to all of the sciences and the
deeper your understanding of the Arabic
languages the more deeper you'll
appreciate. Would you say that the
Arabic modules in Lazar were some of the
most difficult ones? They were tough. Um
and and the thing is have you know if
you noticed with Azar it was
progressive. So it started off from the
beginning all the way down to alia level
in the fourth year. So it took us it
took us from the basics to the advanced.
Um but but I'd say yeah start with the
Arabic language just how how so now
they're listening. They're saying fine
I'm for it you know but I want to know
where do what do I do exactly? How do I
start with the Arabic language? What do
what resources do I tap into if you know
but what is my first step exactly? Like
right now after I finish this podcast
what do I do? Perfect. Very good
question. I think when we started
learning Arabic and I started learning
Arabic, you know, more than 10 years
ago, there weren't very many resources.
You know, we had to go to university. We
had to actually, you know, go to the fly
to a country like Egypt or Syria and
then actually learn with a teacher. And
that that that is still valid. But I
think now we live in a time where
there's so many resources. There's
books, there's so many videos now,
there's tutorials online, um you've got
local teachers, madaris, you've got
makabas, they're all teaching Arabic
now. It's so popular and it's actually
we've got we've got our own little
institute though. We've got uh maybe
we'll put it in the description. Yes.
It's called critical content, you know.
And uh we they've got like we've got a
very good Arabic uh curriculum. You've
got Bayana. Yeah. Yeah. Which is non Ali
Khan's one as well, which is another
resource that is kind of incremental and
starts from a certain uh position and
there are online if you want something
completely free. I think there are
people that going through a book called
you know which is like there are some
you know it's a good book to go through
um there's
one you know that one you've done that
as well for some reason though from the
second to the third book is pretty steep
learning curve is yeah it is um you got
the medina books but to be honest some
people say like okay well the medina
books right in my opinion bro tell me
what you think of this you know this
whole grammar translation
model where you start with like a heavy
grammar heavy approach to learning any
kind of language. I don't necessarily
think that's how language should be
learned. So you you get a lot of people
that know s very well know nah very well
but they can't speak and they can't read
and they can't write and the four skills
reading writing speaking and listening
they don't have those skills. I feel
like that's an unnatural way of learning
a language. And I'm not saying that
there is no place for grammar, but I
feel like if someone starts with
vocabulary,
basic sentences and combines the grammar
translation model with the communicative
approach. Like for let me give an
example like you've done the SELTA
before. Have you done the SELTA? Yeah.
So the SELTA for those who don't know is
like a teaching English as a foreign
language course.
that's run by the University of
Cambridge actually, but they do it in
other centers and stuff like that. And
it's usually like one month course if
it's done full-time or 3 months if you
do it part-time.
And they I think the heart of their
philosophy is the communicative
approach. So they in order to teach
people English language, they'll have
this this approach whereby,
you know, they'll try and get the person
to speak. They'll try and get them to do
more work and they they reduce what they
refer to as teacher talking time, TTT.
So you got to reduce like the more you
talk as a language teacher, the worse it
is for this person to learn the
language. And to be honest, after having
done that course myself some years ago,
I can't remember exactly when. Um it was
a three-month I did it in part-time.
I found that this was in many ways more
I think it was better
than a lot of the models that you've got
out there for language learning. Bro,
it's one of the best ways to learn
language, the communicative approach.
So, for example, if someone can get
their hands on someone living in Syria
or someone living in Egypt or someone
living in those kind of countries and
they can just speak to that person about
a topic using limited first obviously
that person has to teach them the words
and stuff and then just speak a little
bit, you know, 20 to 30 minutes, you
know, three or four times a week. the
learning it will be such more ex like
such an exponential learning um curve
compared to if somebody were to do the
you know the Medina books and just do
the Medina books. What do you think of
this uh philosophy? Yeah, I think
definitely inclined to agree. Yeah. And
language is designed like that is
naturally that's how children learn.
They they literally just listen um and
and and they try to speak very basic and
communicate. They want when when they
want something, they'll say the word
they want. Um, and over time they start
recognizing patterns. And that for them
is the grammar being embedded, you know,
and and they're learning. They're not
actually learning the rules. It's just
over time they're recognizing the
pattern that, oh, anytime I want
something, I use this structure, this
syntax, and therefore it it's effective.
It's functional because it gets me what
I want. So definitely agree on that
front. I think there needs to be more.
But I guess it depends on the goal of
the student. If is does the student want
to learn how to speak? And I think
that's a noble noble uh goal and I think
it's very important because one of the
ways that we as a nummah can unify is
through through a language. If you look
at Russia, China, America, these are
huge countries with vast populations.
And one of the thing that binds them and
makes ruling over them easy is the fact
that they have one language. Whereas we
kind of lack that. Like we we're a huge
ummah but we kind of speak different
languages. So if you were to pick one
language to choose to unify us, it makes
sense to pick Arabic. I think no one
would really dispute and say, "Oh,
you're being ethnically, you know,
you're being racist." Like, maybe
English at this at this stage of this
level of colonization that we've got
happening to us. If we want to maintain
the status quo, no problem. But I think
it's so it's definitely a good You speak
to your kids in Arabic at home, isn't
it? I try to 100%. Yeah. And and have
you found that that works with them?
Like can they respond now? And slowly
she has my my baby. She she does respond
now. Um but she mixes it with English.
Yeah. Yeah. It's still better than
nothing, doesn't it? It's still better
than nothing. So yeah, I think
definitely what you just touched on is
very important. Start with the next
generation cuz we learned an acquired
language. You're Arab yourself, but me,
I had to learn it. You know, I went out
there and actually learned I used to
speak, which is a bit different. It's
almost a different language. You had to
learn. You had to learn the grammar.
Exactly. So, so we've learned it, but
our children have the, you know, the
advantage of us being able to give them
what we didn't have and start speaking
to them early, expose them. There's so
many material out there. Even I remember
when I used to live in Egypt. Um I used
to go around and there used to be like
this person that used to sell CDs of
like animes and cartoons and media.
Basically I just wanted to consume just
to improve my listening because remember
what you all of these skills guys they
need their own time. If you want to get
good at speaking you have to speak. If
you want to learn how to listen you have
to listen. So one of the skills I wanted
to improve was my listening skills. So
I'd go and look for like a CD and then
I'd get the CD and then I'd go home. I'd
download it. I'd burn it onto a and it
was a long process and then I'd watch
watch watch and then I'd start my speed
my listening would improve. But now
there's so much material online you can
just search online series translated
they're all um in so it depends on what
your goal is. If you want to speak learn
how to speak. If you want to learn how
to read then you have to learn grammar
because grammar to in reading go hand in
hand. And the more deeper you want to
get into the sciences, eventually you
will have to hit that stumbling block of
grammar to appreciate, you know, the
Quran, the meaning because grammar is
grammar. It's Aristotle said that if you
want to become like an all-rounded
person, you have to get good at three
things. You have to get good at logic,
you have to get good at rhetoric, and
you have to get good at grammar. And to
be honest, I think grammar and logic are
very similar.
And if anything, grammar is way more
complicated. If anything like you know I
think grammar has way more depth than um
than logic to be honest and credit
credit goes to our great scholars and
luminaries that went out and formulated
these rules. Imagine the task that that
entailed. They have to literally do
inductive logic. They'll have to go to
and start listening and analyzing and
the works of of the of the bedins the
written works the the statements of the
Quran the prophetam
and then start deducing rules. Yeah. And
saying okay this is the pattern I start
to recognize it all in the hopes of
transmitting it and passing it on to the
next generation of right and Islam
spread became a necessity and this is a
very good point about how our great
scholars in the past they adapted to the
need of the time. So they saw that we're
spreading and people are, you know, they
they're in need of this language. So how
do we teach it to them in the most
effective way? And there you go. The
rules started formulating and then
growing and evolving until we till we've
reached now. And I think this is a very,
you know, a very amazing, you know,
attitude or attribute that our great
scholars had in the past. They weren't
just mere translate, you know,
transmitters. They weren't just parrots.
They weren't like follow this curriculum
you go, you're done.
that they're sticking to tradition but
they're thinking of creative ways in a
curious manner of how they can enhance
it, make it better. So for example in
grammar if we stick with grammar um
obviously there were people that came
out made the rules but then then over
time you had people like Ib Malik who
came and said okay let me make a
thousand line of poetry that encapsulate
all of this uh grammar rules and it's an
excellent medium because grammar because
poetry was like their media of the time
that was the thing that they entertained
and that was the thing that they studied
and and they they like to listen to let
me make it in that format genius if you
think about it and and it wasn't just in
grammar space it was in many spaces like
imar
hadith was everywhere but he came along
and he was like why don't I make a
criteria a strict criteria and compile
all the sound hadiths again he's not
deviating from tradition he's still if
anything he's reinforcing it but he's
doing it in a very cur create creative
way and then there you go you got and
then that led to that Muslim and the
other books same with you know you've
got the Quran hadith the traditions but
then you took great minds to come along
and categorize them classify them make
ab out of them and and again passing it
on and I think we're at the stage where
we're unfortunately kind of just
consuming and just paring whereas we
kind of do in our time need to think of
ways that we can pass that knowledge. So
let's let's go back to you know the
basic person lay person working person
watching this from home or let's say the
educated person people that are watching
this are educated you know they they
have some level of education you know um
they want to know more about Islam so
they want you've mentioned Arabic so we
said okay you've got all these resources
online resources maybe you can go to
your madrasa maybe you can go to your
masid they have their own see what's
going on around you. Okay, so they've
got like a weekly schedule for learning
Arabic because they realize that Arabic
fa Arabic the classical Arabic is the
key to all Islamic sciences. Fine. What
else would you say? What would you
suggest? Obviously studying the basics
of the dean basic tenants of faith and
iman if you don't know already I think
growing up in the west um it's we we
were exposed to many western ideas you
know and atheism was heavily promoted in
school and religion was downtrodden you
know it's like come on it's not really
serious you know it's it's just fairy
tales it's a good thing you reminded me
Richard Dawkins uh I don't know if you
saw but he responded to me he was doing
some reaction videos to me I might make
a video after this responding
Yeah, maybe I have a discussion with
this man and as you can see it's still
ongoing and and this was very very
ferocious ferocious campaign against you
know religious people. So definitely I
think understanding why you believe what
you believe is important. Questioning
you know yourself like alhamdulillah if
if you're born Muslim you kind of hit
like jackpot like we should be very
grateful like we could we could have
easily been born non-Muslim and
generally speaking whatever religion you
belong to even if you don't practice
that religion at some point you return
back to it. So like a Hindu when he grow
like when he grows up most likely he'll
come back to it. same as a Christian,
same as a Muslim who's not practicing
and at some point they'll come back to
their culture. So it's very unlikely and
difficult for and I think they're like
unicorn situations where people actually
sit down create uh critically think
about what is the truth and they
actually start going out there and
exploring those people are kind of rar
people that Allah literally guiding but
if you're a Muslim already firstly
obviously say alhamdulillah but second
understand the deen understand you know
the apostomology behind it I don't I
don't want to go into technical terms
but yeah okay so let's let's give this a
practical flavor somebody just wants to
start okay you mentioned Arabic so we
went a couple of things with that they
want to do for example
a basics of
one of those things right so what would
you recommend for them so in the UK
mainly there's a lot of so that's a good
place to start you know there's loads of
good um structured from basic
intermediate to advanced text in hanfi
law so for the people that don't know
obviously there's four schools of
thoughts that are primarily dominant um
you know and hi um and the m is very
prevalent. So start with there you know
understand the basics of if you don't
you know you know prayer tahara salah um
but just don't stop there that's the
problem a lot of people just study the
tahara and the and the salah and they
stop there which is fine because you
want to know the law that affects you
the most and salah does affect us the
most in in dayto-day but carry on you
know zakat the rules of zakat understand
hajj umra um Ramadan study that stuff at
least to a basic level alhamdulillah we
kind of went all the way right we we
were we remember we were studying about
camels and what camels we need and the
different names of camels is pretty
difficult. I always say that's one of
the hard ones. It's one of the hard ones
and they were like what camel to
subhan Allah bring back memories PTSD.
Subhan Allah. So yeah for those who
don't know is like you know when you
have well cattle and livestock you know
you have to give zakat on the cow and
livestock and then you have to give like
for example if you got cows there's got
to be a cow of a certain gender and a
certain age
certainly. Yeah. Yeah. So,
was difficult also bu
inheritance which is like transactions.
Yeah. Inheritance. Yeah. Yeah. It's kind
of like fractions but you you got to
have a bit of a mathematical mind with
it as well. And I guess this is one of
the I would say one of the cons of the
of the degree. Like I don't think we've
kind of covered the pros and cons. I
think the pros were obviously it's
online so it's flexible. Yeah. So even
if you're working, you're busy, you can
fit around it around your schedule. M um
and two it's um so it's not you don't
have to be there so you can you know you
can be in London you can be anywhere in
the world and still stay connected to
tradition and it's the same thing that
they would learn if they were in it's
exactly the same degree it's exactly the
same and I would argue that ours was
more organized because I hear from
students who are on the ground that
actually learn there it's much more
disorganized it's much more harder to
like at least we had a you know
everything was structured in Google
drives the videos our materials we had a
WhatsApp group any questions issues
administratively we So it's a very
wellrun program you know couldn't
couldn't complain even the systems
supporting the program was very good you
know you go into the portal you can see
the grades you can log into your exams
and but you can't actually access this
if people say okay I want to do that
well if your Arabic isn't very very
strong like for for a westerner then you
you cannot access that yeah this because
it's academic Arabic isn't it it's is
everything is you have to be proficient
in Arabic and the better your Arabic is
the more you know well you do you're
writing your examinations in Arabic your
your verbal examinations cuz there's a
verbal examinations as well. You're
doing that in Arabic. You're doing the
they've got the cameras on you as well
and they want you to share the screen.
Um, and you're writing like essays in
Arabic. You're doing your homework in
Arabic. You're doing everything in
Arabic. So that's why we mentioned in
the beginning if you if you want to get
to a certain level where you can
actually explore these things, then you
have to m not master but you have to be
fluent in Arabic. That's that's the
fact. Yeah. 100%. And and while we're on
this topic, we might as we give them a
quick quick five minutes of how to how
the how the program works in terms of so
anyone who's interested and who believes
that they have reached a level of
proficiency in Arabic language where
they can confidently do the exam doesn't
have to be perfect but just enough to
you know be able to read, listen, speak
and write. Yeah. Um obviously you just
go to the portal um links can be
provided um the answer portal and you
just have to provide your details your
passport picture uh your passport photo
a certificate that shows your
proficiency in Arabic. Now don't stress
too much about this because you can just
go to a teacher that you trust um or an
institution and just say can you please
print out for me that just shows me I'm
prof proficient. The most tricky part
the the challenging part is a stanoa
certificate and usar are very very
adamant on this secondary school the
secondary school certificate. So I used
my A levels. Yeah me too and I know
people but I know people that use their
GCSEs. So don't panic even if you don't
have A levels you can use your GCSEs.
Now what you need to do is you need to
have obviously your original. I wouldn't
give them your I wouldn't give them your
original. I'd make a copy that looks
very close. I think I gave them my
original. They sent it back recently.
Yeah, they sent they they will send it
back to you, by the way. So, if you do
send your original, they'll send it back
to you at the end of the four years, of
course. Yeah. Four years. So, what I did
was I kind of made a copy that looked
like the original. Then I took this
original and I got it apost
[Laughter]
and and so I made a copy and then I got
the apostl, the lawyer stamp that says
this is a true likeness of this uh
certificate. Mhm. And then I translated
this document into Arabic. Yeah. And
then I got a confirmation
that the Arabic is correct and fine and
it's not it's legit Arabic. And then you
send them to um on the portal and then
inshallah it should be okay and they
should accept the process. And then
there's two terms that run every year.
So whenever you apply they would you' go
into the next term. So you're getting
commission out of this brother.
I want I want people to learn if you're
at the level cuz I've actually had a lot
of questions people asking me what's the
process you know can you explain so
there's a process in summary obviously
we can we can add some documents and
stuff to support you guys um more
details and stuff
yeah we got to a stage in the
conversation where we covered we were
trying to do this kind of step by step
because we don't want to just talk about
experiences without making it meaningful
to the end user here making it relevant
to their lives making it practical to
their day-to-day structures. Yeah. And
we spoke in the beginning about the
importance of time management and
chunking and I mean in psychology I
think they do call it especially like
self-help circles they call it chunking.
We did that together like before the
examinations etc. We did a lot of that
through four years and that was what I
would say kind of pushed me through it
at least. Not sure about your experience
but this whole process like I knew that
I'm going to call you at this time.
we're going to go through these things
together, these documents. So, it was
very good. And then we spoke about
Arabic and the different approaches to
language and you know the communicative
method versus the grammar translation
model etc. And then we spoke about
knowing some maybe basic
um how about the Quran
as well like memorizing the Quran. I
think this is something
that sometimes is so accessible to
everybody
and it will it has so many benefits that
it's it makes no sense not to engage
this process. So let's talk about this a
little bit. You know someone that wants
to memorize the Quran what would be a
way that
you know like they could do that. It's a
very good point. I think the Quran is is
the basis of it all. Right. It's it's
from the Quran and the desire to
understand and implement the Quran that
we even begin our journey um of
learning. So we we know exactly what the
what Allah wants from us and and we can
worship. So definitely that should be up
there in the priority list. Now
memorization is something that is always
going to be ongoing. Yeah. And I think
everyone should prioritize it because
what it will do automatically is it will
force you to have a relationship with
the Quran. M the moment you say I'm
going to memorize the Quran that moment
you and the Quran have become very close
because if you se because you can't
separate if you separate you're going to
lose that objective you're not going to
memorize and you're going to lose it so
having that as a goal itself already is
going to get you closer to the Quran and
if you're close to the Quran I'm telling
you brothers and sisters your barak is
going to increase your barak will
increase and the more you you know what
else as well it's sorry to cut you off
there but no it's baraka increases but
there's I feel like it's a psychological
benefit as
On the days that I don't go through the
Quran or don't do mura or whatever it
may be, I really just feel like my mood
is different. Yeah, I see. It has this
kind of soothing effect. It has this
kind of calming effect. It has this
anxiety removing effect. Yeah. And this
is the Quran refers to itself as shifat.
It's shifat. It's literally a cure. And
it can be a physical cure. It can be a
psychological cure and it's definitely a
spiritual cure cure. So it's a cure in
all these ways. And the beautiful thing
about memorizing the Quran is that it's
it doesn't matter whether you memorize
it or not to be honest in that sense.
It's more about the process itself. And
that's why the prophet sallallam hadith
is
and for each one deed good deed is
multiplied by 10. So the thing is if
you've got 77,000 words of the Quran uh
or you're holding a section for example
a J
and you're going through all these words
each letter that you're getting so many
rewards like if you if it was like a
game like a games console and you can
see the amount of rewards you're getting
from the Quran you wouldn't want to stop
doing it because it's you get so many
rewards from it. So, it's a no-brainer
really to be honest. Just have 15 to 20
to 30 minutes a day like minimum, you
know, where you're just going through
the Quran, it's an absolute and that
could be one of the most staple things
you do, one of the most spiritually
important things you do in the entire
day. 100%. I mean, if you have nothing
else but the Quran, you're okay. Like,
if you if you couldn't get nothing done
in a day and you read at least a page of
the Quran, I think your your good day
was good. It was a good day because I
know some we get busy. We do get busy. I
mean it's it's not easy but if you can
just fit that in somehow even just the
page you'll feel the difference you as
you said you feel content you feel you
know at peace and and if you think about
what you're reading as well cuz don't
forget the Quran is a guidance I mean
people don't real learning Arabic and
we're learning you know and
all of this stuff we're learning alli
and the bottom line is these are a lot
of them are I mean we're trying to
really they're instrumental knowledge to
understand what the Quran is saying
we're trying to understand what Allah is
trying to communicate to us because it's
guidance. That's the bottom line. So if
it's guidance and it's we're trying to
understand how Allah wants us to live
our lives, how how he wants us to
transact with the world, how interact
with people around us, then we're
extracting great benefit from the Quran.
It's not just like oh we're doing it as
a spiritual routine or we're doing it as
some kind of a an exercise for
memorization which is which is a benefit
like mentions
you know there's nothing like basically
saying that in a much more poetic and
better way but I'm just summarizing is
you've got to keep practicing you use it
or you'll lose it kind of thing
basically you'll lose it or you'll lose
it uh which is memorization of Quran
etc. And the prophet told us that it's
like more more fleeing than than a camel
etc. if you don't use it. So there's all
that kind of thing about memorization
which is important as well. But
there is I think the answers to our
questions as cliche as this may sound
are found in the Quran. I've been doing
philosophy for many years now. Yeah.
I've gone through some of the great
thinkers of the west, the great thinkers
of the east. We've gone through it
together. We done philosophy in the in
Azhar. They have like modules which were
interesting and it was good. It was good
quality modules the history of
philosophy and philosophy and all this
kind of stuff. But nevertheless the
Greek philosophy module that was
interesting as well. You you you taught
me he taught me a lot about that. It's
the only one I almost got 100% in
examination.
That one that was good. You knew stuff.
But I I mean like
you know um when you go through that and
you realize okay what is philosophy?
Philosophy is essentially like you know
the love of wisdom. That's what the word
means. Felo Sophia. Felo means the love
of Sophia is wisdom. There's nothing
wiser in the Quran.
There's nothing you're not going to get
like Kant Hume Gazali whoever it may be
you know Aristotle none of them are
going to say something wiser than what
you're going to find in the Quran.
And I know it sounds like a tall claim
or for those who don't believe in Islam
who watching this it's like okay
whatever like you know but once you
understand what's being said in the
Quran it just summarizes things in such
a beautiful and basic and elegant and
eloquent way. In fact the most beautiful
and the most basic and the most eloquent
way possible. And it just gives you what
you need to do. How can someone in their
daily routine forgo such guidance? 100%.
Whatever you're reading is not better
than that. You know, there's no book
that's better than the Quran. There's no
It seems like if you're a true believer,
if you if you really believe in Islam,
you believe that this Quran was sent to
Muhammad through the angel Gabriel by
Allah. This is what you believe. And you
believe that these words are the speech
of the all- knowing creator of the
universe. And yet you have all this time
to read everyone else
except for for that. It's a loss. It is
a loss indeed. And the Quran is is
Subhan Allah.
you know um all of these things you
mentioned you know like the grammar the
linguistics
these are as you said these are
they are tools that are getting us to a
goal what's the goal is the Quran that's
that is literally what we're trying to
do and what's amazing is the Sahabah the
the you know the prophet sallallahu
alaihi wasallam that era their Arabic
was at the so when they they could
really appreciate the Quran they could
really enjoy it. It was hitting them. It
was hitting them. Whereas because we we
don't even know the Quran. We don't know
the Arabic. We don't know that. Yeah.
Our scholars had to say, "Okay, we need
to we have to create these knowledge uh
these these sciences with the intent
purpose of getting people back to that
relationship." And that's why you can
have that basic relationship of just
reciting as you said. Yeah. And then
there's a deeper level of understanding.
Yeah. And bro, there's so many like do
you know what a translation of the Quran
essentially? Do you know what it is in
my view? It's just a tap. That's what it
is. It's not a translation of the Quran.
It's a translation of the meanings of
the Quran. Most of them would have to
say that actually if you open the first
page and say this is a translation of
the meaning which means we have to our
you know disposal
all of these in English
the clear Quran this one that one it may
be and you can read all I actually enjoy
sometimes reading the old school one was
it pal. whatever ye this and this is a
crusher. What do you think of the what
made you think of the crusher? I love
that stuff. It's like I might even use
it.
You know, it's like I was I was reading
some of the, you know, the translations
in in in the old old school English was
fantastic. I don't know why why people
are reading this new stuff. This is a
crasher and this and that. what me
making you think of this and that.
Fantastic guy was you know but uh so
you've got all of this to your disposal
and yet you don't want to spend just 10
15 minutes just 10 15 minutes brother
you know we spend 10 15 minutes like
scrolling or this and that. Spend 10, 15
minutes, 10, 15. Time it. Put your do
this with your watch, you know, with a
bezel or you can use a stopwatch or you
can use whatever you like or or use your
phone. Just put 15 minutes and just say,
"Okay, I'm going to read the Quran and
then spend just 5 minutes." Okay. What
does that word mean? I I guarantee you.
Yeah. I guarantee you anyone watching
this at home right now. Yeah. If we get
one of the small suras, maybe not too
small, but let's say or something
or whatever, like bring a small surah
and what is mutin? What is this? What I
guarantee you don't know what like 90%
of the people what is this thing? Have
you let me ask you a question. Are you
not curious to find out?
It's Allah is communicating this thing
to you and he's saying woe to the
to these. It's like okay who are wo is
like you're telling me that a curse on
this group of people called mutaf
and if you put a gun to the head of 90%
of the people in the um and this is just
they say I don't know what the maf is
get shot and get killed. It's if it
wasn't about it's sad. It's a sad. Be
curious. You're curious about everything
else. You're curious about what your
neighbor bought for for dinner. You're
curious about what this person, you
know, where he went to holiday, the
latest gossip. You're you're curious
about the celebrities. You're curious
about Muhammad's latest video, which is
fine.
You're curious about everything. You're
curious. Sorry to say, you're curious,
but you're not curious to know what
Allah meant by this word or this word or
what did he mean by that?
Come on, man. This is what kind of Islam
is. What kind of faith is that? What
kind of belief is that? What kind of you
know, I say that and I'm, you know, I go
through through some words in the Quran
myself and I sometimes pause and think,
what does this word mean? I forget what
the word means. I have to go and check
cuz I I feel embarrassed that I don't
know it after all this learning. like
you know the word kalala I forgot what's
what's kalala mean again obviously the
inherit of this and that whatever that
you know maybe I forgot
that you know what I mean so it's like
you know it makes me think what this
word mean here and what does that what's
this what's I need to go check what
these words mean
but people don't give a damn it's and
and that's really sad and that and
because if you're away from the Quran
you're away from Allah really isn't it
if your if you if your relationship is
weak with the Quran, your relationship
is weak with Allah. Okay, let's be
honest. Yeah, most people that are
watching this have had some kind of
romantic relationship with someone.
Sorry to say. No, in the in the West, of
course. In the West, you know, either
either they've done it halal or haram,
they've liked someone in school, they
like someone in the university, they've
had an engagement. I would say 80% of
people that are watching this have had
that relationship. Yeah. And then for
example, when the person that you like
so much, they send you a WhatsApp, you
see their name like light up and this
and that, you feel like, okay, I want to
see what I'm so curious. I just I just
want to know what this person is going
to say. What are they saying? Because it
gives you that hit, that dopam and
you're curious, but Allah is is the one
who's the is he is actually he's the one
you should love the most. And he's
telling you everything, giving you all
these communications, and you don't even
care. The truth is, let's be honest, the
reason why people don't care about it is
because they lack faith. So to say,
Annie, it must be that it's they just
lack faith. You you don't care because
you don't actually know whether Muhammad
wasallam was a true prophet or not. You
don't you don't know yet. You're not
fully convinced. Maybe you are
convinced, but you're not fully fully
convinced. If you were if you were 100%
sure that this was
and you this was a message from Allah,
there's no way you'd be every day
wasting time not even read the Quran.
Yeah. One day. Yeah. There's no way.
It's impossible. I don't believe it. It
means you are you have you have you have
you have you have doubts you have you
have all of this you have all of the
bad. If you are not curious I'm not
saying if you don't know because
Even when it comes to reading and
reciting, the one who tries gets two
rewards if you're not trying at all if
you're not you don't care. Like I don't
see how you can have faith
or good faith, a good level of faith and
and be like this. Yeah. Do you agree
with that? I'm being a bit harsh here.
No, I think you're right. I think
there's a lot of factors. One is
definitely, you know, doubt and the
other is just distraction from the the
and and you know, castle, you know, you
just want to you want to get rich, you
want to make money, and the the hustle
and bustle of of living in in in a
western country can distract someone.
Even though in the east, these people
are watching from Pakistan. These people
are watching from Egypt. These people
are watching this being translated.
They're hearing it in different
languages. Subhan Allah. And everyone's
got their own thing that they're
concerned about, right? In fact, in
these countries, they're even more
desperate sometimes. Subhan Allah. Have
you Have you seen when you gone to
Egypt? you went to Egypt, you see the
people coming around and asking this and
that and money and let's be honest, it's
not and they're affected by the by
what's happening in the west as well.
Yeah, you're right. Distractions,
heedlessness,
you know, it's it's one of those things.
Okay, so going back to the know, it's a
bit of a rant.
We spoke about the Arabic language. We
spoke about the basics of basics of then
you spoke about for those people who are
ready the process of if you wanted to do
something like aar we we we also spoke
about um Quran you know and how that
they have to have something in of the
Quran in the daily basis
what else would you add to this skeleton
we won't give them too much we want to
give them something that is doable would
you add anything else to this yeah I
mean I would say obviously
have the correct intention of why you're
learning right why you want to learn one
is and it's for me as well and for us is
one is to remove ignorance from
ourselves you know we want to know
exactly how we should worship allahel
and so we're doing the right things so
having that clear understanding and two
is to help your family as well and to to
save them from you know
100% and and the three is to be of
service to your community and then to do
the dawa and you know solve the many
burning issues and problems that the um
is facing today that as we alluded to
the solutions for which are in the Quran
whether it be philosophical, economical,
political, what whatever problems you're
having, I'm telling you Islam will have
an answer for it. But you'll never ever
unc uncover those answers if you've not
even begun that journey of learning and
removing ignorance from yourself.
Removing all those ideas that were
ingrained in us growing up, whether
through media, whether through what we
learned in schools, whether what we
learned through friends and all of these
various mediums. We need to unchain from
all of that. And one and this is the
starting point is is the knowledge is is
going back to the Quran and and and and
Sunnah and and so everyone has to have a
purpose or role. Now what's interesting
is even us you know people that okay
we've learned something it is a duty on
us to to to convey the message and to
and to spread the knowledge and I think
I touched upon the difference between
and there's another word also has the
idea of action and when you see in it
used in the Quran
has the notions of
proficiency mastery so it's something
that you perfect and
subhan Allah But there is a verse in the
Quran in surah Allah is talking about
the the bunn is and how they're doing
all these mad crazy things and Allah is
rebuking the scholars and saying why do
the rabbis and the scholars do not you
know forbid them from saying the evil
things they're saying and engaging and
in consuming the unlawful thing. Um
which indicates that one the thing
they're doing it shows that they're
experts at it. So the scholars are
experts like they have they have learned
to a degree where you can call them
masters. So they should know better and
two is very important and two the
implication of that of
is not only are they masters they're
also twisting their religion to to
justify it to justify it. So it sounds
like me suffer
the right price
and and it's true and and it's like and
it's and but this is a warning when we
we read that in the Quran we see Allah
rebuking these people that are doing
that but then it should be a warning for
us as well for people that have learned
and um you know anyone who's learned to
a certain degree they have a
responsibility to enjoy the good forbid
the evil because the moment you stop
doing that the moment you see obviously
the misguidance, people going off
course. And so I think yeah, this this
bit here is a huge point because I'll be
honest when I started you know
practicing I think when I was like 17 18
I started more as like a hardline copist
and um that um had its positives and
negatives. The positives were like this
you know this um focus on hadith the
hadith and is it authentic or is it not?
That that was actually really good
because it made you realize that there
was hadith that were not authentic and
there were hadith that were really
authentic, you know, and that there were
hadith that were in the middle somewhere
like Hassan or Hassan and they gave me
literacy when it comes to the hadith and
stuff and you know cognizance of the
different grades of hadith. Obviously it
the movement I'm not talking here we're
here talking about neocism right the way
is the way of the companions and stuff
neoism is um has its positives and
negatives. So neocopism like the trend
and the movement one of the negatives of
it for me personally was it didn't have
for me anyway growing up there wasn't a
focus on Tesia there was not a focus on
Tesia in the sense that like when you're
when you're um trying to deal with the
situation or
the issues like accountability of the
self or uh doing of the or removing the
impediments from the heart of Of course
Jo and others who are Salafi minded
right like student ofamia have written
extensively and excellently about these
topics but in terms of like modern
application yeah it wasn't there for me
uh as a young at the time Celi like
hardline Celi neocie um like as a 17 18
year old and it so I started to develop
this kind of if you like I'm not going
to say superiority complex but it is
this kind of saved segment I'd a little
bit and and what that does it comes with
a lot of arrogance and judgmentality and
this warped understanding of
which is like let's make of these people
and whatever I wasn't at that level of
things but still I was being influenced
by that kind of thing so I mean at the
end of the day um the reason why I
brought this to your attention is
because later on when I started to read
the works of the Ghazali for example
because one of the things a lot of the
neoy movement is like don't read the
kazali he's a deviant you know a lot of
them were like
Um but a lot of them are not like that.
A lot of them are like you know actually
to be fair I mean it's it's not it's a
it's not monolith it's it's a diverse
group of people. Um just like any other
sect just like Sufis you have extremist
Sufis you know and you have a very
moderate or you've got people that are
more like you know they don't they don't
indulge in the bid and the and the
whatever they do. Yeah. So on that
point, so like Tesia
is something I I learned to
develop you know later on. Yeah. Because
then I started to engage the works of a
little bit more. I read I read from a
very young young age I read um a lot of
his not all of it I think I read
majority of it or a lot of it. I read a
lot of his other works as well and
Ibamia had these kind of works as well
that that's that's what you get it from
this elephant and and to a lesser extent
that's where you get your if you want
from or
um but then when I grew up a little bit
more I started reading uh
and stuff and I know that there are some
issues with the hadith on there and
there are some which are very nice like
edits that they remove all of the weak
hadith or things that are not correct or
whatever.
That changed the game for me. I have to
say
it really changed the I have to be
honest. It did actually because there
was like a systematic there was clearly
clearly a systematic approach to
purification of the self.
Yeah. And some brothers that I met as
well that were that they were they had
systems that mashallah excellent systems
um whereby you'd focus for example
on on like uh let's say for example
Tesia you you remove the uh what the
seven organs this is mentioned by like
the seven organs he mentioned it which
are like the seven um things which lead
to the heart so the eyes the tongue
which is like speaking and touching and
hitting walking hearing um and the
stomach and the private parts these are
the seven and these all these seven lead
to the heart and Your job is to try and
pur first of all it's to try and purify
those things to have a conscientious
effort whereby you're looking at your
daily life and you're thinking okay I
want to remove I want to be better at
lowering my gaze for the sake of
argument even though like right now it's
very difficult in um being open be open
very difficult in London and very
difficult to lower your gaze however
it's possible it is actually possible
there's a way of doing it it's like and
to be honest those who don't lower their
gaze especially Muslims who don't know
their gaze There's an issue. I'm not
saying I'm perfect at this. Definitely
not. Yeah. But I'm saying that those who
do it in a certain depraved way. It
doesn't come across as classy. I mean,
they look at the woman and the woman
looks at them and she's almost like
scoffing at them and arrogant like, you
know, why are you looking at me? I would
never look I would never even think of
you anyway. So, there's almost like ego
element like why would you why would you
give her that power over you to do
that's a different issue. Um the point
I'm making is that if you think about
purification,
so I'm going to look I'm going to spend
30 to 40 days or 50 days or 2 months or
whatever it may be just looking every
day at how good am I at lowering my
gaze. So then you start to become
conscious because if you're not like
that in living in London there's no way
there's all types of shapes, all kinds
of colors, all kinds Sorry to say sorry
to put it this way, you know, but every
everyone says like you know your your
eyes are going to be everywhere. M so
unless you put something on yourself
then you that's number one. Number two
is what you say. So like for example if
you if you're some people like some
Muslims men and women they got pot mouth
they swearing all the time. They even
some of them do in front of their kids.
Yeah. They got their kids there and they
say f you and this and that and s this
and s word. This is like sorry it
doesn't show refined behavior. I'm not
saying I'm the bastion of this myself.
I'm you know I don't swear like that to
be honest. Nevertheless, if if you have
that problem, then why not spend 30 or
40 or 50 days just looking at what you
say? Some people backbite with what they
say. Some people they keep attacking
their brothers or sisters and say
jealous things or whatever it may be. Or
some people they drink or eat wrong
things, you know, and so on and so forth
with the seven uh things that go and
then the is like a next level up. So you
look at now this what
mentions in some of his books like
and so some of the things like okay so
jealousy and and resentment and all of
these things and and shah and all of
that you have to there has to be a
program whereby you're looking at these
things bit by bit
I was reading a book about people's
biography yeah and he like their daily
lives I forget the name of it the book
but I read the whole thing and one of
the most interesting ones It was like
getting all the successful people. This
guy got all the successful people. I can
get you the name of the book and he was
like these are their daily routines.
Yeah. Benjamin Franklin has a very
interesting bit daily routine. He said
every week I'm going to focus on a
different virtue.
Like for example, one week I'm going to
focus just on generosity. One week I'm
just because he wanted to add this to
his software. If you like you know this
is adding new layer to his software. If
you want to be a virtuous person, if you
want to be a person that's free from
impediment, then you have to work like
this. You have to it's difficult to out
all the things I'm going to do it all at
once. You have a conscientious like
accountability type effort. That's what
I was missing in my hardline neoy days.
But then when I realized the world is
bigger than that and also that there are
books and and and and publications that
so transformative so excellent and then
you start putting it in a daily routine
and I want to maybe end everything with
a bit of discussion about daily routine
because I think this is um very key bro
like for example I um recently what I
used to do before I used to have like
this I can show it to you actually maybe
I'll show Yeah. But I used to have these
I used to put up my journal. So I have
my journal, right? And then I just like
in a week I have to do this 1 2 3 4 5 up
to 10 things. For example, if we were
doing last together, I say, "Okay, this
week I have to do 10 hours of revision
with Mosab or in general or 20 hours,
whatever. 15." Yeah. Closer to the exam
periods, it would get really tough. Like
I'd have to put in 15 hours a week or 24
one it is one module or something like
that because otherwise there's no way
you can get through it.
And then you chunk it and you put it in
different pl. Yeah,
I used to put it in a diary in a tick
box thing. Now I realized you can use
Google sheets
um Excel sheets. So I've been using
Excel sheets like for let me give an
example. You know in the top where you
have like your rows and columns, you can
put on your phone. You can put like a
little thing where you put like um you
know for example Quran. Yeah. For
example, I want to do half my my thing
is I want to do half an hour a day of
Quran. So I'm going to put there half an
hour. Yeah. And then whatever whatever
isar
for example Arabic whatever you put your
own categories there and then what you
do is you after about four weeks of
doing whatever you're doing you can make
it into some kind of a line chart and
see your productivity go up and down.
What do you think of this? because a you
you've been doing this stuff as well.
You've been doing
jiu-jitsu
uh and for those who don't know it's
very difficult to get to a black belt.
It takes a long time. It takes over 10
years usually like you know you know
jiu-jitsu um master's degree um you know
the what's the other one? The azar at
the same time the family you've got the
kids you've got the wife all that stuff
to juggle all of it you just need to
have really good discipline. Yeah.
And really good time management. So talk
to us a little bit about time management
and the importance of it. Yeah,
definitely. I think just before I do, I
think it's just just to touch on the the
point. I think some people miss that um
they think that for example to sell off
or purification is like a list of
actions you do and then you're you're
good. But it's a it's a state that we're
constantly in and we're constantly
battling ourselves um to be better. So
there'll be situations where you'll be
tempted by a different chah. Some people
will say to self if this is like ba.
We're not talking about the bida
elementation spinning around and
dancing. We're saying literally yeah
that and and everyone can relate to
this. You will have situations guys
where you're put in a position where you
will feel your heart and your inside
internal at some moment you'll feel
jealousy for someone. At some moment
you'll feel anger towards someone at
some moment you'll feel envy towards
someone. You are going to feel these
emotions. So you have to ask yourself
how can I remediate and address this
now? Because there's nothing wrong with
it cuz Allah made us like this. So Allah
knows you know that we have these
elements in us and some of it is more
prominent than others. Some people are
very much more prone to anger than
others and some are more prone to
jealousy than others. But what you have
to recognize is the whole process is the
purification process is how do I address
this? I know I have the problem. So one
is obviously not denial and
understanding you have this problem and
the two is how can I now improve this
situation so that mahal is in a state
where it's in line with Islam in line
with you know what pleases Allah and his
messenger sallallahu alaihi wasallam so
and we know don't get angry don't get
angry don't be jealous for your brother
so there's you know tactics that even
you know the sahaba used like every time
you know you know they felt jealousy or
envy they would make dua for the person
say no Allah increase that person you're
counteracting that natural emotion that
anyone will get. You know, if you're not
human, you're not going to get these
emotions. But we're human. We will get
these emotions. So, as soon as you feel
for someone, just feel, you know, ya
Allah, increase them because you
recognized it and you're remediating it
immediately. And the more you do it,
inshallah, the more you're refining your
yourself and the more older you get, the
more easier it will become because it's
young. You're hard. When you're younger,
you're like a clay. Your hormones are
there. Your hormones are there. Your
influence is very, you're not very
intelligent. You're not very bright. But
as you get older, you know, this is what
even philosophers say Aristo when you
get to like 30s and 40s, now you get to
the mature age. Now you're
it should inshallah get easy unless and
but you have to start addressing it and
if you leave it till 40 then that's very
bad because then it will still be
difficult because you've left it that
late and you've taken no action. I think
Kazali said something where if someone
reaches the age of 40 and they and their
good hasn't overcome the evil then stop
preparing for hellfire because you you
had all this time and you haven't
prepared. So yeah, we have to constantly
prepare and and do it. And the good
thing is
everyone's a mistake. Yeah. You know,
maybe you have the objective. I'm not
going to I'm going to lower my gaze, but
then you stumble. Doar and do it. Try
again. Inshallah, that'll be recorded as
a good deed now because Allah will
forgive you and now you're going to try
again. As long as you're trying and then
you slip up, forgive me. So it's a
constant iterative process. None of us
are going to reach perfection. This is
this is the point we have to none of us
are going to be like that's it. I've
reached angel level now. I am sin free.
I am guaranteed paradise. No, being a
human is about constantly being provoked
by many many tests, many challenges. And
you might be clear of one, but you're
going be, believe me, you're going to
get thrown into another one. So, it's
it's that constant back and forth to get
your soul to get your mind, your soul,
your body to its optimal level because
everyone's capacity is different. Not
everyone's going to be a scholar. No,
everyone's going to be a black belt
jiu-jitsu, you know. I'm not trying to
use that as a standard or something. I'm
not I'm not trying
I'm not trying to use that as a
standard, but whatever your students
say, what whatever
your goal may be, whatever your
aspiration, some people might not even
value a backb. They might be like, I
don't I don't care about that. But
whatever you value, um, not everyone's
going to reach that thing. Like some
people might want to be a millionaire.
Nothing wrong with that. It's halal. As
long as you do it in a halal way, that's
a fine objective. But if you do get
there, just send some money over this.
Subhan Allah. So it's yeah, it's a
constant battle of improvement and
growth and and as long as you have that
mentality, you can do these things where
you you know you know it seems
overwhelming. I've got studies. I've got
this. But you will make time for it
because you have that in your that
mentality. I want to constantly strive
and improve. And yeah, you're going to
have people that are not going to make
the cut. Sadly, you're going to see
people like that. You're going to see
jal. They're going to be people around
you. See them all the time, bro.
You got one of them over there.
So, you're going you're going to see
you're going to see some going to make
it. And and so
you shouldn't let them be your measure.
You should actually try and look up.
That's why we look up to the Sahabah.
Because look, this is a good point that
we raised earlier about we're all doing
all of this studying and all these hours
just to understand the Quran. Yeah.
Really. And so if you look at the
Sahabah really what every Muslim is
trying to do is trying to be like the
Sahabah who basically were the best
followers of the prophetam. And the
Sahaba were the complete package. And
this is what I'm trying to you know
promote in myself is okay they were very
knowledgeable. They were very you know
they had deep f they were very wise
people but they were also courageous
they were warriors they were on the
battlefields spreading Islam and that is
they were the complete package that's
missing now either we have someone who's
very academic and very knowledgeable but
it's like they're very cowardly or you
have someone who's like brave and
courageous they're fiery spirit they're
giant they don't know they don't know
you know the left right so we need to
have the complete package and the Sahaba
were the embodiment of that you know and
and of course but you have to recognize
the the environment they were growing up
in you know bravery bra bra bra bra bra
bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra bra
bra bra bra bra bravery was encouraged
so
poet preislamic guys he's pre Islamic
you know he used to have po poetry like
um
I like it. Yeah. So pick for yourself a
station that will raise and elevate you
or die an honorable death in battle in
the battlefield. Do you know what I
liked from his one as well? Yeah. when
he goes um
obviously this is not you know in line
of the Quran in a sense but it's it's
still interesting and he doesn't mean it
in that way anyway goes
if you meet a wild man or if you meet an
oppressor be even more oppressive with
him and if you meet a wild man show him
what wildness is basically you know show
show him and it's from the same
actually. Yeah. And he says in these
concepts
and death, you can't escape it. Even if
you built yourself a fortress with with
huge rocks, you won't protect yourself
against it. Um
[Music]
Mhm.
So it's better for someone a young man
to die in honor than to die you know as
a prisoner to seductive gaze of a woman
basically. So even the way even even
though he started off his whole by the
way for those who don't know Richard was
actually half black half black half Arab
he was a slave and he was um he was the
best or one of the best poets before the
prophet Muhammad sallallahu alaihi
wasallam they've made like series about
him in Arabic and you know dad was was a
was a warrior big warrior but also he
was a romantic guy so he's talking about
these women in but he
You know, he started off he's talk he's
going outside the his lover his lover's
house and he says
he's speaking to the house speak back to
me. Yeah. And and and and know it's good
thing you mention about the slave. So he
was a slave but he mentions it in in the
same poem in the same poem he says even
though you consider me as a slave for
him
my ambitions and aspirations is above
the star of the north star this is how
they were thinking and so keep in mind
this and other poets poems like this the
Sahabah were listening to even the proam
was aware of this this was what they
were learning so and what is the poet
talking about you know being honorable
being brave courageous having high
aspirations so they were being
cultivated by these type of things
before the Quran we're talking right and
you know he's got this amazing line
where he says my horse is a merchant of
death and my sword is a doctor that
cures the heads of anyone can play
the poetry is on a different level on a
different level guys and this is what
I'm saying and they were they were
learning this stuff and they were like
and that was cultivating this is this is
the real rap the real this is the real
this is drilled now they're now sorry to
say the drill and grime listen to what
they say these Guys, listen to what the
drill artist say. You know, Central Sea
or, you know, one of the guys lives in
actually close to my area and his uh
famous line that he's he thinks is an
excellent historical piece is where he
says, you know,
he says, "How can I be homophobic?"
Yeah.
And then he says, "My," and this is the
B word, right? "I gay. How can I be
homophobic?
Is my my the B word. His girlfriend is
gay. Now everyone's talking about this
and the young says, "Oh, wow. It's such
a amazing." This is not even that great.
Not even. It's rhetorically actually
substandard.
It's amazing. You compare that with the
Merchant of Death quote that you just
gave. But it just shows how influential
it is. You see, but this this is the
stuff that affects the children now.
Yeah. On the streets, literally. Drill
music. Look at the youth now. That's
what they're influenced by. That's what
they aspire to be and and it's kind of
it's a similar parallel. Imagine you're
listening. To be honest, I think that's
the instrumental is better than the
speech.
You know, whatever the instrumentalist,
the guy that should be acclaimed in
these things is the instrumentalist
because he's making this kind of great
beat. But when you listen to what these
guys are saying,
it's Yeah. Sometimes it can be good
rhythmically like it's good rhythmic.
You know, it's not good rhetorically,
bro. No, it's absolutely garbage. And
it's and and they're not conveying
meanings which are like noble or
honorable or meaningful. Yeah. It's it's
Yeah. Gutter down in the gutter kind of.
Yeah. It's like what you're talking
about. And then he's talking about the
watches that he's got, for example. You
know, don't get don't touch my watch
this. And I get, you know, what do you
mean? Is this all you can talk about? Is
this all you this all you got? Exactly.
And and it's and it's sad because and
that's what's framing the culture and
the mentality of the youth. They think
that's noble. Whereas when you listen to
this type of poetry, let me tell you
something. I went to Japan recently.
Yeah. And I was with one brother named
Machi. He's a very good guy. He's
actually in my vlog as well. And one day
we went out with a kimono. You know, you
know the kimonos. It's like the
traditional Japanese. And we rent it
out. We walk around and uh we walk
around in Japan with a kimono. Yeah. And
then we come back and give back the
costume to the shop. Yeah. And uh we
went we had dinner that day with Sharief
and other guys. And uh he said, you
know, it's really interesting. We know
someone should start a business in the
UK where we have the same experience,
you know, where some tourists come over.
Yeah. And get dressed up. He goes, "And
then they can dress up like a road man
for an
ide
[Laughter]
for a day." Subhan Allah. Yeah. But so
this is what I'm trying to say is these
are the distractions that we've got
around us. And what I'm trying to say is
that when you have a plan, when you have
a goal, when you have a particular, you
know, program for yourself in a
particular routine, then these
distractions become as you at least you
can recognize them as meaningless. These
are just like, you know, let them talk,
let them rap, whatever. Let these guys
do this, let these guys sell that, let
you know, let this all happen. I've got
my own goals and objectives. Yes. Yes.
That far out, you know, far nobler, far
greater, you know, because nothing is
going to be greater than your mission to
please Allah. Absolutely. That's a great
that's a great you know it's interesting
I saw Daer man recently you know I don't
know if you saw Daer man he used to be
um go do da in the streets and stuff
like that I saw in Dubai and I'm sure
you'd mind me saying this but he
actually made a really really excellent
point and he was like you know um about
shawads we were talking about shawad and
desires and you the same kind of topic
as we're talking about today and he made
a really excellent point he said look
the best way to solve the issue of
shahawat and desires and all this kind
of
he said is to have goals.
It really was a he I don't think he
realized he but he this is a very
profound point. If you think about
whatever it is that you've ever wanted
to achieve in your life whether it's
jiu-jitsu this that the other kids
anything that you've ever thought was
important and you wanted to achieve you
had to apply um a degree of
self-restriction
discipline. Yes, you know to yourself
because you thought about that goal and
objective. This will interfere in me
achieving this goal and objective
and so everything starts with goals.
Yeah.
The person that's watching this at home
and that wants to start with like
student of knowledge stuff and they want
to become more knowledgeable in Islam.
The first thing you ask yourself is why
am I doing this? Like ne said and this
is a why saying of his. If you have a
why then almost any how is possible.
Yeah. You you have to start with a why
like a really strong why. Why am I doing
this? What is the reason? If someone's
answer is because I want to uh I want to
have I want to be beneficial
to everyone around me to the Muslim
people to the non-Muslim people. I want
to be a beneficial entity in this
universe and I want to spread guidance.
Yeah. There's no greater why than that.
Yes. So someone now establishes that's
the why. Then the question is how can
they do it? And they there's no way you
can spread guidance without knowing it.
And so I want to learn Islam.
Number one, I want to remove the
ignorance from myself. Then I want to
remove it from other people. Yes. And
I'm going to start off with all the
things that we've said. And if you want
real practical advice, I don't know what
you think of this. A I would say I've
checked all these habit trackers online.
I've I've I've downloaded almost every
single one of them and all of them are
rubbish in my opinion. Anyone can say no
no no but this one this app here is
excellent in my opinion is nothing
better than Microsoft Excel
the tracker bro Microsoft Excel gives
you the most maximum freedom in being
able to set you know your rows and your
columns and you can use chat GPT you're
one of those other things like Gemini
tell chat GPT these are the categories I
want give me a formula that I can put in
and chat GPT that's it job it will get
you a good formula that you can put in
and then you just track on that and then
you could genuinely your life can change
just by tracking your your behavior cuz
you start looking at yourself. Look,
think of it this way. Yeah. Imagine
someone spend 60 years of their life, 70
years, 80 years living. Yeah. And
because we're living in an age which is
different to any age that came before in
the sense that there's way easier access
to like technology and the internet and
all this scrolling and all this kind of
stuff. and they see a pie chart of how
they spent their 80 years and 30 or 40
years is spent scrolling.
That would be a start. If they know that
that will happen and they could have
affected this by having a more
conscientious and positive outlook on
how they see their own life, then
they would be foolish not to implement
these habit tracking routines. Make a
change. You got to make a like have a
goal. My goal is to do this, to learn
this, to learn this, to learn this, to
learn this, and then just work
backwards. And every day is one step
closer to moving like what we did with
the with and the relief that we have now
and and the feeling of achievement that
we get from that. To be honest, the
feeling of achievement that you get from
stuff like that gives you more self
validation than any external party can
give you. Would you agree with this?
It's true. When you achieve the goal
that you set out to, you know, you feel
like, wow, subhan Allah. Yeah. You don't
care. Like someone can call me ignorant.
Like right now if I go in the street and
someone calls me ignorant saying okay
thank you for you know stupid. It's like
at this point it's calling Usain Bolt
slow.
You can call me what you want but I know
like do you think Usain Bolt has a has
an insecurity about being slow? You know
he doesn't because the thing is you put
yourself in a position Yeah. where
you've validated yourself and you've
tested yourself and you put yourself in
a position where you've now proved to
yourself that you are at certain level.
Now once you've achieved this knowledge
I this is so important and critical and
you mentioned this and I think I should
also emphasize this point which is that
basically it's like I look at people
with much less if you like knowledge
than I I have but they're so much better
people than me like in a sense that I
can go to one of developing countries
quote unquote and just see this guy he
knows basics of Islam but his h his
generosity his whatever it may be his
respect his kindness
his compassion is just so much better
than mine. The is my So how comes I've
I've done all this time in but my is not
all that. How comes I'm not really doing
how comes I'm not really doing and this
and that. How comes I'm not fasting
every other day? How comes I'm rough
when I'm dealing with people? M it's
maybe time that you stop thinking about
amassing knowledge because can be like
that as well like amassing knowledge
like slap stamp collections and and and
I'm like collecting something and think
about implementing that knowledge on my
family members first my community second
and whoever else after totally agree
totally agree I mean yeah you raised a
good point about you know when you were
mentioning the AI as well about I think
um the scholars of the past just to to
tack on to the point you made about they
learned the knowledge but then they
thought of the best ways to propagate it
right how can I now make this accessible
to the others whether it's a line of po
whether I write this for in poet poetic
form whether I create a book that's more
structured and easier to understand and
digest um but what we don't want to do
is become parrots as you said you know
just consuming knowledge and information
and we're walking around like donkeys
with books on our back we don't know
what to do with it we've just consumed
this knowledge and and it's just
information to us and that's what's
actually they've actually done a study
MIT did a study where they measured the
brain activity of people that use AI and
they found that people that depend too
heavily on AI they have um basically
cognitive uh debt built up build up so
what that basically means is when you
outsource your thinking to AI you don't
do the thinking yourself another machine
is doing it so it solves a short-term
problem like answers a question gets you
an essay done but the long-term interest
the debt you have to pay is that you
have lost some ability to think for
yourself. That's right. Yeah. And it's
cognitive atrophy where and it's the
same like I feel like my dad and like my
older sisters and stuff, they're so much
better at knowing the streets of London
cuz they didn't have satav in their
time. It's a very good example. Very
good example. And because they use it's
like a muscle. It's like if I can if I
keep lifting something with my with my
arms, my arms will stay strong muscular.
I use a toss
also like watches like you know if you
don't most people now probably don't
even know how to tell the time like you
get like the average 1230 they look at
their phone and that's digital whatever
it is they're using smartwatch exactly
you know if you put this watch on them
you don't they don't even know how to
process it is it five is it six is it
what is it the smartwatch is making them
dumber yeah it's making them the
smartwatch is making them dumber and we
don't and so whereas and it's true and
it's the neural connections are being
being made weaker your ability to
problem solve has become weaker. So, but
if you have a strong base, so some of
the things we said to the to the guys,
you know, get your Arabic unlock, get
some of your basic and basic unlock, get
a good cognitive baseline and then use
AI to augment that and to drive you
forward to the next stage. Don't do the
opposite where you're just depending on
AI and you're just outsourcing all your
thinking ability to it. um therefore
just becoming a robot that can't think
for themselves because we're in d now as
an um to have problem solvers people
that look sit down look at some of these
problems that we go through and start
figuring out from an Islamic point of
view from the tradition how we can solve
a lot of these problems and obviously we
as believers we are 100% confident
allahel that yes we have solutions for
these problems from Islam whether it's
poverty whether it's so societal
problems whether it's occupation
whatever whatever it may be we have
answers for this and that's one of the
reasons why we study in the first It's
not just study for study's sake. It's
okay. Now I have this knowledge. How do
I solve the problem? So for example, we
studied the history of Islamic world,
right? We studied from the prophetam all
the way down to modern times. And
someone now might just take that and be
like, "Oh, that's interesting. I now
have history." But someone who's quite
proactive in thinking would say okay
actually from the time of the pro Islam
after the first 13 years till very
recently we've had Islamic rule and
authority we've had Islamic rule and
authority and so anyone who studies
history but we like we've done we can
see a timeline of con of of a constant
then a sudden deviation
and do you know what percentage of our
history because I'm into data and
statistics do you know what percentage
of our history has been without Islamic
rule. Rounded down 7%. Oh, really? So
93% of our history of who we are has
been under Islamic authority. Now strong
or weak, there's been moments of ups and
downs, but generally speaking, we've had
a nominal figure that has unified the
ummah and has the solution, the
political structures to help us. Now
what we're shown
so that would make so again we have this
data. What do we do with it? There's a
deviation. So this should indicate that
this was done by strategic design of
course. Yeah. Yeah. And what lo and
behold when you actually pinpoint that
area that that region where we lost the
the you know the 1924 it's like speak
post world war postc colonialism and you
start seeing oh actually yes this they
were scheming and devising and and
carving up the Muslim world and breaking
it down. So you can see that the 7% that
we live now we've experienced was a was
done by design but two it's the 7% that
they tell us is our entire history. Mhm.
That's what they teach us from. It's
like our history starts from 1920s
onward. You know, your national heroes,
you know, your national anthem, your
flag, your color, your history, your
culture. It is this entirety of 7%.
Whereas when we study this stuff now,
which is way more impressive. Exactly.
And then now you look at the the whole
picture, it situates you in in, you
know, in the correct historical context.
And we actually see actually this 7%
we've had the most violence, invasion,
occupation, oppression, injustice,
genocide done against the Muslims in
relative terms, this you know compared
to the 93% it's been disproportionately
higher with the 7%. So and the golden
ages of Islam was in the 93%. the golden
age of and in in terms of intellectual,
scientific, philosophical, whatever even
military campaigns and conquest,
greatest liberations happened in the
93%. So a smart man would look at that
and go actually we should actually find
a way to get back to our normative state
which is the 93%. And to go back there
isn't romanticism or
you know fantasy. It's actually normal
to get back to 93%. If anything, a
fantasy is to believe that this 7% is
going to fix itself and this is what
defines who we are. So it's the reason I
made this point is we study this now,
but now it's like how do we use that
knowledge to interpret the realities
around us to better understand the
context and better understand our place
in the world and what we can do to
contribute. Absolutely. Everybody who's
watching this has a specific talent or
ability or skill that they know or they
don't know that or if it's not latent
then it's potential. Uh if it's not
manifest it's could be manifest. And one
of the great things that Emanuel Kant
did say is one of the worst cardinal
sins for him was someone not fulfilling
their potential. Right? And so everybody
here that's watching um your job as a
Muslim person in particular is to be the
best version of yourself from a
spiritual and mental and physical
perspective. But then it's to use that
to the best of your ability to then
transform the ummah in whatever capacity
or way you know how. And the end goal is
that we can become united as a Muslim
ummah and that that unification will
actually bring about all of the things
prosperity in a safeguarding of like you
said things like the genocides won't be
happening. We won't have to endure that
all the time and and more. So I think
that's uh a really good place to end
this bro and I think people are going to
want to see more of you after this uh
this episode inshallah. So you you have
to promise that in the future you come
back we'll do something else inshallah.
No this just again for having me good
friend and and obviously we've had we've
been from it through an insane journey
four year journey together. Yeah
definitely and and I think we praise
Allah that we got out of it and and now
it's yeah now it's we're in a situation
where yeah we will implement it
implement and start helping and
ourselves and others where we're
possible inshallah. Well I think you've
done that today. That's a good first
step. Let's see if you continue.
Allah bless you. Thank you, man. And
guys, uh, inshallah, we're going to try
and persuade Musab
to create his own channel and, create
his own social media so that you can go
and see his stuff. I'll do that
privately cuz I'm sure you're going to
want to hear his perspective again.
Hey, you are you wasting your time on
social media again? Your brothers and
sisters in Islam net from Norway are
establishing a masid, a da center.
Establishing a masid to convey the
message of Islam is one of the best
deeds a Muslim can do. There's a huge
need for it in Norway. You know this and
I know this. So that makes the reward
even greater. So give generously and
Allahawel will give you even more.